post on highest-academic-qualification (#409)
DFE-Digital/bat-design-history: app/posts/register-trainee-teachers/2021-08-03-highest-academic-qualification.md

---
title: Removing the highest academic qualification question
description: Why we don’t think we need this question and an alternate design if we do.
date: 2021-08-03
---

For trainees on undergraduate courses the provider has been asked for the trainee’s highest academic qualification.

The question was causing users confusion. It seems to be because it’s inconsistent with how users think about academic qualifications. A teacher training provider thinks about a trainee’s qualifications as the measure of whether a trainee is qualified for their course and often what their ‘tariff points’ value is. In research sessions users tried to give the trainee’s actual qualifications. When users found they could only provide a single qualification most users re-read the question and were able to give the answer the service wanted.

> ![Highest academic qualification — first iteration.](highest-academic-qualification-v1.png "Screenshot of ‘What is the trainee’s highest academic qualification?’ question and answers")

Reviewer: I think you may have alt text and caption the wrong way round.

Author: Yep – fixed, thanks!

---
title: Removing the highest academic qualification question
description: Why we don’t think we need this question and an alternate design if we do.
date: 2021-08-03
---
{% from "figure/macro.njk" import appFigure with context %}

> For trainees on undergraduate courses the provider has been asked for the trainee’s highest academic qualification.

Reviewer 2: Annoyingly I don't think we did a blog post on highest qualification. Without that, can we add a screenshot for the current page here?

Author: 👍  will do

> The question was causing users confusion. This is seems to be because it’s inconsistent with how users think about academic qualifications. A teacher training provider thinks about a trainee’s qualifications as the measure of whether a trainee is qualified and often what their ‘tariff points’ value is. In research sessions users tried to give the trainee’s actual qualifications. When users found they could only provide a single qualification most users re-read the question and were able to give the answer the service wanted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The question was causing users confusion. This is seems to be because it’s inconsistent with how users think about academic qualifications. A teacher training provider thinks about a trainee’s qualifications as the measure of whether a trainee is qualified for their course and often what their ‘tariff points’ value is. In research sessions users tried to give the trainee’s actual qualifications. When users found they could only provide a single qualification most users re-read the question and were able to give the answer the service wanted.
```

> The options we gave as answers confused the users too. Its a long list that includes qualifications that were too low level to be relevant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The options we gave as answers confused the users too. It’s a long list that includes qualifications that were too low level to be relevant.
```

- 9 don’t have any highest qualification data
- 58 do have a highest qualification

Of the 58 records:

- 26 Any combinations of GCE 'A'/SQA 'Higher'/SQA 'Advanced Higher' & GNVQ/GSVQ or NVQ/SVQ at level 3
- 11 'A' level equivalent qualification not elsewhere specified
- 11 Other higher qualification
- 5 ONC or OND (including BTEC & SQA equivalents)
- 3 Foundation course at FE level
- 1 NVQ/SVQ level 3
- 1 Baccalaureate

As (roughly rounded) percentages:

- 45% Any combinations of GCE 'A'/SQA 'Higher'/SQA 'Advanced Higher' & GNVQ/GSVQ or NVQ/SVQ at level 3
- 19% 'A' level equivalent qualification not elsewhere specified
- 19% Other higher qualification
- 9% ONC or OND (including BTEC & SQA equivalents)
- 5% Foundation course at FE level
- 2% NVQ/SVQ level 3
- 2% Baccalaureate

Using this page on [What qualification levels mean](https://www.gov.uk/what-different-qualification-levels-mean) you can group them into levels:

- 75% are level 3
- 19% are ‘other’
- 5% Foundation course at FE level
- 2% Baccalaureate

> Given that the data is too high level to be of any value to the provider, or trainee (for example, as part of their record) and the number of trainees on undergraduate courses through SCITTs is tiny compared to the number going through HEIs and the data that is captured is 19% ‘other’ there's not much value this can be contributing as a statistical measure it seems most sensible to remove the question.

Reviewer 2: "Given that the data is too high level to be of any value to the provider" - I think this is too strong. We believe it's unlikely to be of value as it seems too high level.

Reviewer 2: First sentence is rather complex.

---
title: Removing the highest academic qualification question
description: Why we think we do not need this question and an alternate design if we do.
date: 2021-08-03
---

> For trainees on undergraduate courses we ask  for the trainee’s highest academic qualification, for example most trainees have ‘A levels’ or ‘Scottish Highers’.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For trainees on undergraduate courses we ask for the trainee’s highest academic qualification, for example most trainees have ‘A levels’ or ‘Scottish Highers’.
```

The question was causing users confusion. It seems to be because it’s inconsistent with how users think about academic qualifications. A teacher training provider thinks about a trainee’s qualifications as the measure of whether a trainee is qualified for their course. This is often measured in ‘UCAS tariff points’ and often several types of qualification in combination make up the right amount for eligibility. In research sessions users tried to give the trainee’s actual qualifications. When users found they could only provide a single qualification most users re-read the question but did not have the correct answer to hand. Instead they would try using the UCAS tariff points calculator to determine the highest qualification. 

> “I assume the DFE wants to know the range of all the qualifications trainees have to have in order to be eligible for training on our course [...] and usually that would be a combination of qualifications. But this – this is a bewildering list of too many things and you can't do them in combination!”

> > “Oh it’s only asking for the highest, I didn't read the question. I'd look at the grade values and weighting [...] I'd look at tariffs and see what was highest. I'd Google the UCAS calculator, it looks at what everything is worth.”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> “Oh it’s only asking for the highest, I didn't read the question. I'd look at the grade values and weighting [...] I’d look at tariffs and see what was highest. I’d Google the UCAS calculator, it looks at what everything is worth.”
```

![Screenshot of ‘What is the trainee’s highest academic qualification?’ question and answers](highest-academic-qualification-v1.png "Highest academic qualification — first iteration.")

The options we gave as answers confused the users too. It’s a long list that includes qualifications that were too low level to be relevant.

> “This is asking for ‘the highest’ but a lot of these are at the same level. This list for an undergrad doesn’t make sense because you have to have a level 3 qual to go onto a UG course. Here I wouldn't know what you'd want from me. 

>   We wouldn't register someone with just level 2 or level 3 because that's not high enough for training with us.”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  We wouldn’t register someone with just level 2 or level 3 because that’s not high enough for training with us.”
```

## DTTP data

> This spreadsheet of [EY Undergraduate by 'Highest qualification on entry'](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/u/1/d/1fb2ialqhFKxVh8WZ8yeoeKkJrtcJNnUm/edit#gid=1730684280) has 67 records for the last 2 years.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This spreadsheet of [EY Undergraduate by ‘Highest qualification on entry’](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/u/1/d/1fb2ialqhFKxVh8WZ8yeoeKkJrtcJNnUm/edit#gid=1730684280) has 67 records for the last 2 years.
```
